README.md, before:

<div align="center">
  <img src="nanobot_logo.png" alt="nanobot" width="500">
  <h1>nanobot: Ultra-Lightweight Personal AI Assistant</h1>
  <p>
    <a href="https://pypi.org/project/nanobot-ai/"><img src="https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/nanobot-ai" alt="PyPI"></a>
    <a href="https://pepy.tech/project/nanobot-ai"><img src="https://static.pepy.tech/badge/nanobot-ai" alt="Downloads"></a>
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/python-≥3.11-blue" alt="Python">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green" alt="License">
    <a href="./COMMUNICATION.md"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Feishu-Group-E9DBFC?style=flat&logo=feishu&logoColor=white" alt="Feishu"></a>
    <a href="./COMMUNICATION.md"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/WeChat-Group-C5EAB4?style=flat&logo=wechat&logoColor=white" alt="WeChat"></a>
    <a href="https://discord.gg/MnCvHqpUGB"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Discord-Community-5865F2?style=flat&logo=discord&logoColor=white" alt="Discord"></a>
  </p>
</div>

🐈 **nanobot** is an **ultra-lightweight** personal AI assistant inspired by [Clawdbot](https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw)

⚡️ Delivers core agent functionality in about **~6,000** lines of Python (excluding tests) — **~99% smaller** than Clawdbot's 430k+ lines.

## 📢 News

- **2026-02-01** 🎉 nanobot launched! Welcome to try 🐈 nanobot!

## Key Features of nanobot

🪶 **Ultra-Lightweight**: About ~6,000 lines of Python (excluding tests) — ~99% smaller than Clawdbot - core functionality.

🔬 **Research-Ready**: Clean, readable code that's easy to understand, modify, and extend for research.

⚡️ **Lightning Fast**: Minimal footprint means faster startup, lower resource usage, and quicker iterations.

💎 **Easy-to-Use**: One command to onboard and you're ready to go.

## 🏗️ Architecture

<p align="center">
  <img src="nanobot_arch.png" alt="nanobot architecture" width="800">
</p>

## ✨ Features

<table align="center">
  <tr align="center">
    <th><p align="center">📈 24/7 Real-Time Market Analysis</p></th>
    <th><p align="center">🚀 Full-Stack Software Engineer</p></th>
    <th><p align="center">📅 Smart Daily Routine Manager</p></th>
    <th><p align="center">📚 Personal Knowledge Assistant</p></th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><p align="center"><img src="case/search.gif" width="180" height="400"></p></td>
    <td align="center"><p align="center"><img src="case/code.gif" width="180" height="400"></p></td>
    <td align="center"><p align="center"><img src="case/scedule.gif" width="180" height="400"></p></td>
    <td align="center"><p align="center"><img src="case/memory.gif" width="180" height="400"></p></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center">Discovery • Insights • Trends</td>
    <td align="center">Develop • Deploy • Scale</td>
    <td align="center">Schedule • Automate • Organize</td>
    <td align="center">Learn • Memory • Reasoning</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## ✅ Requirements

- Python 3.11+
- Node.js 18+ (only for the WhatsApp channel)
- Optional: Docker, uv

## 📦 Install

**Install from source** (latest features, recommended for development)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/HKUDS/nanobot.git
cd nanobot
pip install -e .
```

For contributors:

```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

**Install with [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv)** (stable, fast)

```bash
uv tool install nanobot-ai
```

**Install from PyPI** (stable)

```bash
pip install nanobot-ai
```

## 🚀 Quick Start

> [!TIP]
> Run `nanobot onboard` to create `~/.nanobot/config.json`. In an interactive terminal, it will also prompt you for API keys (you can skip and edit the JSON later). Use `nanobot onboard --no-prompt` for non-interactive runs.
> Get API keys: [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/keys) (LLM) · [Brave Search](https://brave.com/search/api/) (optional, for web search)
> You can also change the model to any provider/model you have access to.

**1. Initialize**

```bash
nanobot onboard
```

**2. Configure** (`~/.nanobot/config.json`)

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "openrouter": {
      "apiKey": "sk-or-v1-xxx"
    }
  },
  "agents": {
    "defaults": {
      "model": "openai/gpt-oss-120b:exacto",
      "memoryScope": "session",
      "maxConcurrentMessages": 4
    }
  },
  "tools": {
    "web": {
      "search": {
        "apiKey": "BSA-xxx"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**3. Chat**

```bash
nanobot agent -m "What is 2+2?"
```

That's it! You have a working AI assistant in 2 minutes.

## 🖥️ Local Models (vLLM)

Run nanobot with your own local models using vLLM or any OpenAI-compatible server.

**1. Start your vLLM server**

```bash
vllm serve meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct --port 8000
```

**2. Configure** (`~/.nanobot/config.json`)

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "vllm": {
      "apiKey": "dummy",
      "apiBase": "http://localhost:8000/v1"
    }
  },
  "agents": {
    "defaults": {
      "model": "meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct"
    }
  }
}
```

**3. Chat**

```bash
nanobot agent -m "Hello from my local LLM!"
```

> [!TIP]
> The `apiKey` can be any non-empty string for local servers that don't require authentication.

## 🖥️ Web UI (Optional)

Prefer a local browser chat UI? Enable the built-in `webui` channel.

**1. Configure** (`~/.nanobot/config.json`)

```json
{
  "channels": {
    "webui": {
      "enabled": true,
      "host": "127.0.0.1",
      "port": 18791
    }
  }
}
```

**2. Run**

```bash
nanobot gateway --webui
# or enable channels.webui.enabled in config.json and run:
nanobot gateway
```

**3. Open**

- `http://127.0.0.1:18791/`

Notes:

- By default it binds to loopback (`127.0.0.1`) for safety.
- If you bind to a non-loopback host (e.g. `0.0.0.0`), set `channels.webui.authToken` and open with `?token=...`.

## 💬 Chat Apps

Talk to your nanobot through Telegram, WhatsApp, or Feishu — anytime, anywhere.

| Channel | Setup |
|---------|-------|
| **Telegram** | Easy (just a token) |
| **WhatsApp** | Medium (scan QR) |
| **Feishu** | Medium (app credentials) |

<details>
<summary><b>Telegram</b> (Recommended)</summary>

**1. Create a bot**

- Open Telegram, search `@BotFather`
- Send `/newbot`, follow prompts
- Copy the token

**2. Configure**

```json
{
  "channels": {
    "telegram": {
      "enabled": true,
      "token": "YOUR_BOT_TOKEN",
      "allowFrom": ["YOUR_USER_ID"]
    }
  }
}
```

> Get your user ID from `@userinfobot` on Telegram.

**3. Run**

```bash
nanobot gateway
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>WhatsApp</b></summary>

Requires **Node.js ≥18**.

**1. Link device**

```bash
nanobot channels login
# Scan QR with WhatsApp → Settings → Linked Devices
```

**2. Configure**

```json
{
  "channels": {
    "whatsapp": {
      "enabled": true,
      "allowFrom": ["+1234567890"]
    }
  }
}
```

**3. Run** (two terminals)

```bash
# Terminal 1
nanobot channels login

# Terminal 2
nanobot gateway
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Feishu (飞书)</b></summary>

Uses **WebSocket** long connection — no public IP required.

```bash
pip install "nanobot-ai[feishu]"
```

**1. Create a Feishu bot**

- Visit [Feishu Open Platform](https://open.feishu.cn/app)
- Create a new app → Enable **Bot** capability
- **Permissions**: Add `im:message` (send messages)
- **Events**: Add `im.message.receive_v1` (receive messages)
  - Select **Long Connection** mode (requires running nanobot first to establish connection)
- Get **App ID** and **App Secret** from "Credentials & Basic Info"
- Publish the app

**2. Configure**

```json
{
  "channels": {
    "feishu": {
      "enabled": true,
      "appId": "cli_xxx",
      "appSecret": "xxx",
      "encryptKey": "",
      "verificationToken": "",
      "allowFrom": []
    }
  }
}
```

> `encryptKey` and `verificationToken` are optional for Long Connection mode.
> `allowFrom`: Leave empty to allow all users, or add `["ou_xxx"]` to restrict access.

**3. Run**

```bash
nanobot gateway
```

> [!TIP]
> Feishu uses WebSocket to receive messages — no webhook or public IP needed!

</details>

## ⚙️ Configuration

Config file: `~/.nanobot/config.json`

### Providers

> [!NOTE]
> Groq provides free voice transcription via Whisper. If configured, Telegram voice messages will be automatically transcribed.

| Provider | Purpose | Get API Key |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `openrouter` | LLM (recommended, access to all models) | [openrouter.ai](https://openrouter.ai) |
| `anthropic` | LLM (Claude direct) | [console.anthropic.com](https://console.anthropic.com) |
| `openai` | LLM (GPT direct) | [platform.openai.com](https://platform.openai.com) |
| `groq` | LLM + **Voice transcription** (Whisper) | [console.groq.com](https://console.groq.com) |
| `gemini` | LLM (Gemini direct) | [aistudio.google.com](https://aistudio.google.com) |
| `zhipu` | LLM (Zhipu/GLM) | [open.bigmodel.cn](https://open.bigmodel.cn) |

### Agents

`agents.defaults` controls runtime behavior of the core agent.

| Field | Purpose | Default |
|------|---------|---------|
| `workspace` | Workspace path | `~/.nanobot/workspace` |
| `provider` | Explicit provider override | `""` |
| `model` | LLM model id | `openai/gpt-oss-120b:exacto` |
| `maxTokens` | Max tokens per response | `8192` |
| `temperature` | Sampling temperature | `0.7` |
| `maxToolIterations` | Max tool loop iterations per message | `20` |
| `memoryScope` | Memory isolation boundary: `session` = per chat (channel:chat_id), `user` = per user (channel:sender_id) | `session` |
| `maxConcurrentMessages` | Max number of different chats processed in parallel (messages within the same chat are still sequential) | `4` |
| `memoryMaxChars` | Prompt budget for memory injection (chars) | `6000` |
| `skillsMaxChars` | Prompt budget for skills injection (chars) | `12000` |
| `bootstrapMaxChars` | Prompt budget for bootstrap files (chars) | `4000` |
| `toolErrorBackoff` | Tool retry backoff (attempts) | `3` |
| `autoTuneMaxTokens` | Auto-tune response length | `false` |
| `initialMaxTokens` | Initial tokens when auto-tune is on | `null` |
| `autoTuneStep` | Auto-tune step size | `512` |
| `autoTuneThreshold` | Auto-tune trigger threshold | `0.85` |
| `autoTuneStreak` | Consecutive triggers to adjust | `3` |

### Memory

Memory files live under the workspace `memory/` directory and are scoped based on `memoryScope`:

- `session`: `memory/sessions/<safe-session-key>/MEMORY.md`
- `user`: `memory/users/<safe-user-key>/MEMORY.md`

`safe-*` keys are derived from `channel:chat_id` or `channel:sender_id` with filesystem-unsafe characters replaced (e.g., `:` -> `_`).

nanobot indexes memory into `memory/memory.sqlite3` (SQLite with FTS when available) and retrieves only the most relevant chunks per request, instead of injecting a growing `MEMORY.md` into every prompt.

### Sessions

nanobot persists chat history as JSONL under `~/.nanobot/sessions/`. Session writes are locked and atomic, so concurrent chats (or multiple processes) don't corrupt the history.

<details>
<summary><b>Full config example</b></summary>

```json
{
  "agents": {
    "defaults": {
      "model": "openai/gpt-oss-120b:exacto",
      "memoryScope": "session",
      "maxConcurrentMessages": 4
    }
  },
  "providers": {
    "openrouter": {
      "apiKey": "sk-or-v1-xxx"
    },
    "groq": {
      "apiKey": "gsk_xxx"
    }
  },
  "channels": {
    "telegram": {
      "enabled": true,
      "token": "123456:ABC...",
      "allowFrom": ["123456789"]
    },
    "whatsapp": {
      "enabled": false
    },
    "feishu": {
      "enabled": false,
      "appId": "cli_xxx",
      "appSecret": "xxx",
      "encryptKey": "",
      "verificationToken": "",
      "allowFrom": []
    }
  },
  "tools": {
    "web": {
      "search": {
        "apiKey": "BSA..."
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</details>

## CLI Reference

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `nanobot onboard` | Initialize config & workspace |
| `nanobot agent -m "..."` | Chat with the agent |
| `nanobot agent` | Interactive chat mode |
| `nanobot gateway` | Start the gateway |
| `nanobot status` | Show status |
| `nanobot channels login` | Link WhatsApp (scan QR) |
| `nanobot channels status` | Show channel status |
| `nanobot skills list` | List all available skills |
| `nanobot skills init <name>` | Create a new skill scaffold |
| `nanobot skills install <file>` | Install a .skill package |

<details>
<summary><b>Scheduled Tasks (Cron)</b></summary>

```bash
# Add a job
nanobot cron add --name "daily" --message "Good morning!" --cron "0 9 * * *"
nanobot cron add --name "hourly" --message "Check status" --every 3600

# List jobs
nanobot cron list

# Remove a job
nanobot cron remove <job_id>
```

</details>

## 🧩 Skills

Skills are modular packages that extend nanobot's capabilities with specialized knowledge, workflows, and bundled scripts. They let the agent handle domain-specific tasks it couldn't do with generic knowledge alone.

### Built-in Skills

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `github` | Interact with GitHub using the `gh` CLI |
| `weather` | Get weather info using wttr.in and Open-Meteo |
| `summarize` | Summarize URLs, files, and YouTube videos |
| `tmux` | Remote-control tmux sessions |
| `skill-creator` | Create and package new skills |

### Using Skills

Skills are loaded automatically. The agent sees a summary of all available skills in its system prompt and reads the full `SKILL.md` on demand when a task matches a skill's description.

Custom skills go in `~/.nanobot/workspace/skills/<skill-name>/SKILL.md`.

### Creating Skills

Ask the agent to create a skill — it has a built-in `skill-creator` skill with full instructions. Or scaffold one manually:

```bash
# Quick scaffold
nanobot skills init my-skill --description "Help with X"

# The agent can also use the full init script for more options:
# python nanobot/skills/skill-creator/scripts/init_skill.py my-skill --path ~/.nanobot/workspace/skills --resources scripts,references
```

### Installing Skills

Install a `.skill` file (a zip archive containing a skill directory):

```bash
nanobot skills install path/to/my-skill.skill

# Overwrite an existing skill
nanobot skills install path/to/my-skill.skill --force
```

### Skill Structure

```
my-skill/
├── SKILL.md          # Required: instructions + YAML frontmatter
├── scripts/          # Optional: executable code
├── references/       # Optional: docs loaded into context on demand
└── assets/           # Optional: templates, images, etc.
```

## 🐳 Docker

> [!TIP]
> The `-v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot` flag mounts your local config directory into the container, so your config and workspace persist across container restarts.

Build and run nanobot in a container:

```bash
# Build the image
docker build -t nanobot .

# Initialize config (first time only)
docker run -v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot --rm nanobot onboard

# Edit config on host to add API keys
vim ~/.nanobot/config.json

# Run gateway (connects to Telegram/WhatsApp)
docker run -v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot -p 18790:18790 -p 18791:18791 nanobot gateway --webui

# Or run a single command
docker run -v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot --rm nanobot agent -m "Hello!"
docker run -v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot --rm nanobot status
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```
nanobot/
├── agent/          # 🧠 Core agent logic
│   ├── loop.py     #    Agent loop (LLM ↔ tool execution)
│   ├── context.py  #    Prompt builder
│   ├── memory.py   #    Persistent memory
│   ├── memory_db.py#    Memory index + retrieval (SQLite/FTS)
│   ├── skills.py   #    Skills loader
│   ├── subagent.py #    Background task execution
│   └── tools/      #    Built-in tools (incl. spawn)
├── skills/         # 🎯 Bundled skills (github, weather, tmux...)
├── channels/       # 📱 WhatsApp integration
├── bus/            # 🚌 Message routing
├── cron/           # ⏰ Scheduled tasks
├── heartbeat/      # 💓 Proactive wake-up
├── providers/      # 🤖 LLM providers (OpenRouter, etc.)
├── session/        # 💬 Conversation sessions
├── config/         # ⚙️ Configuration
└── cli/            # 🖥️ Commands
```

## 🤝 Contribute & Roadmap

PRs welcome! The codebase is intentionally small and readable. 🤗

**Roadmap** — Pick an item and [open a PR](https://github.com/HKUDS/nanobot/pulls)!

- [x] **Voice Transcription** — Support for Groq Whisper (Issue #13)
- [ ] **Multi-modal** — See and hear (images, voice, video)
- [ ] **Long-term memory** — Never forget important context
- [ ] **Better reasoning** — Multi-step planning and reflection
- [ ] **More integrations** — Discord, Slack, email, calendar
- [ ] **Self-improvement** — Learn from feedback and mistakes

### Contributors

<a href="https://github.com/HKUDS/nanobot/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=HKUDS/nanobot&max=100&columns=12" />
</a>

## ⭐ Star History

<div align="center">
  <a href="https://star-history.com/#HKUDS/nanobot&Date">
    <picture>
      <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=HKUDS/nanobot&type=Date&theme=dark" />
      <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=HKUDS/nanobot&type=Date" />
      <img alt="Star History Chart" src="https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=HKUDS/nanobot&type=Date" style="border-radius: 15px; box-shadow: 0 0 30px rgba(0, 217, 255, 0.3);" />
    </picture>
  </a>
</div>

<p align="center">
  <em> Thanks for visiting ✨ nanobot!</em><br><br>
  <img src="https://visitor-badge.laobi.icu/badge?page_id=HKUDS.nanobot&style=for-the-badge&color=00d4ff" alt="Views">
</p>

<p align="center">
  <sub>nanobot is for educational, research, and technical exchange purposes only</sub>
</p>

Commit message:

feat: Enhance configuration management with profile support and data directory resolution

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
  <img src="nanobot_logo.png" alt="nanobot" width="500">
  <h1>nanobot: Ultra-Lightweight Personal AI Assistant</h1>
  <p>
    <a href="https://pypi.org/project/nanobot-ai/"><img src="https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/nanobot-ai" alt="PyPI"></a>
    <a href="https://pepy.tech/project/nanobot-ai"><img src="https://static.pepy.tech/badge/nanobot-ai" alt="Downloads"></a>
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/python-≥3.11-blue" alt="Python">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green" alt="License">
    <a href="./COMMUNICATION.md"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Feishu-Group-E9DBFC?style=flat&logo=feishu&logoColor=white" alt="Feishu"></a>
    <a href="./COMMUNICATION.md"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/WeChat-Group-C5EAB4?style=flat&logo=wechat&logoColor=white" alt="WeChat"></a>
    <a href="https://discord.gg/MnCvHqpUGB"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Discord-Community-5865F2?style=flat&logo=discord&logoColor=white" alt="Discord"></a>
  </p>
</div>

🐈 **nanobot** is an **ultra-lightweight** personal AI assistant inspired by [Clawdbot](https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw)

⚡️ Delivers core agent functionality in about **~6,000** lines of Python (excluding tests) — **~99% smaller** than Clawdbot's 430k+ lines.

## 📢 News

- **2026-02-01** 🎉 nanobot launched! Welcome to try 🐈 nanobot!

## Key Features of nanobot

🪶 **Ultra-Lightweight**: About ~6,000 lines of Python (excluding tests) — ~99% smaller than Clawdbot - core functionality.

🔬 **Research-Ready**: Clean, readable code that's easy to understand, modify, and extend for research.

⚡️ **Lightning Fast**: Minimal footprint means faster startup, lower resource usage, and quicker iterations.

💎 **Easy-to-Use**: One command to onboard and you're ready to go.

## 🏗️ Architecture

<p align="center">
  <img src="nanobot_arch.png" alt="nanobot architecture" width="800">
</p>

## ✨ Features

<table align="center">
  <tr align="center">
    <th><p align="center">📈 24/7 Real-Time Market Analysis</p></th>
    <th><p align="center">🚀 Full-Stack Software Engineer</p></th>
    <th><p align="center">📅 Smart Daily Routine Manager</p></th>
    <th><p align="center">📚 Personal Knowledge Assistant</p></th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><p align="center"><img src="case/search.gif" width="180" height="400"></p></td>
    <td align="center"><p align="center"><img src="case/code.gif" width="180" height="400"></p></td>
    <td align="center"><p align="center"><img src="case/scedule.gif" width="180" height="400"></p></td>
    <td align="center"><p align="center"><img src="case/memory.gif" width="180" height="400"></p></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td align="center">Discovery • Insights • Trends</td>
    <td align="center">Develop • Deploy • Scale</td>
    <td align="center">Schedule • Automate • Organize</td>
    <td align="center">Learn • Memory • Reasoning</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## ✅ Requirements

- Python 3.11+
- Node.js 18+ (only for the WhatsApp channel)
- Optional: Docker, uv

## 📦 Install

**Install from source** (latest features, recommended for development)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/HKUDS/nanobot.git
cd nanobot
pip install -e .
```

For contributors:

```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

**Install with [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv)** (stable, fast)

```bash
uv tool install nanobot-ai
```

**Install from PyPI** (stable)

```bash
pip install nanobot-ai
```

## 🚀 Quick Start

> [!TIP]
> Run `nanobot onboard` to create `~/.nanobot/config.json` (default profile). In an interactive terminal, it will also prompt you for API keys (you can skip and edit the JSON later). Use `nanobot onboard --no-prompt` for non-interactive runs.
> Get API keys: [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/keys) (LLM) · [Brave Search](https://brave.com/search/api/) (optional, for web search)
> You can also change the model to any provider/model you have access to.
>
> Profiles: use `nanobot --profile jason ...` (or `NANOBOT_PROFILE=jason`) to use `~/.nanobot_jason/` instead of `~/.nanobot/`.

**1. Initialize**

```bash
nanobot onboard
```

**2. Configure** (default: `~/.nanobot/config.json`)

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "openrouter": {
      "apiKey": "sk-or-v1-xxx"
    }
  },
  "agents": {
    "defaults": {
      "model": "openai/gpt-oss-120b:exacto",
      "memoryScope": "session",
      "maxConcurrentMessages": 4
    }
  },
  "tools": {
    "web": {
      "search": {
        "apiKey": "BSA-xxx"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**3. Chat**

```bash
nanobot agent -m "What is 2+2?"
```

That's it! You have a working AI assistant in 2 minutes.

## 🖥️ Local Models (vLLM)

Run nanobot with your own local models using vLLM or any OpenAI-compatible server.

**1. Start your vLLM server**

```bash
vllm serve meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct --port 8000
```

**2. Configure** (`~/.nanobot/config.json`)

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "vllm": {
      "apiKey": "dummy",
      "apiBase": "http://localhost:8000/v1"
    }
  },
  "agents": {
    "defaults": {
      "model": "meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct"
    }
  }
}
```

**3. Chat**

```bash
nanobot agent -m "Hello from my local LLM!"
```

> [!TIP]
> The `apiKey` can be any non-empty string for local servers that don't require authentication.

## 🖥️ Web UI (Optional)

Prefer a local browser chat UI? Enable the built-in `webui` channel.

**1. Configure** (`~/.nanobot/config.json`)

```json
{
  "channels": {
    "webui": {
      "enabled": true,
      "host": "127.0.0.1",
      "port": 18791
    }
  }
}
```

**2. Run**

```bash
nanobot gateway --webui
# or enable channels.webui.enabled in config.json and run:
nanobot gateway
```

**3. Open**

- `http://127.0.0.1:18791/`

Notes:

- By default it binds to loopback (`127.0.0.1`) for safety.
- If you bind to a non-loopback host (e.g. `0.0.0.0`), set `channels.webui.authToken` and open with `?token=...`.

## 💬 Chat Apps

Talk to your nanobot through Telegram, WhatsApp, or Feishu — anytime, anywhere.

| Channel | Setup |
|---------|-------|
| **Telegram** | Easy (just a token) |
| **WhatsApp** | Medium (scan QR) |
| **Feishu** | Medium (app credentials) |

<details>
<summary><b>Telegram</b> (Recommended)</summary>

**1. Create a bot**

- Open Telegram, search `@BotFather`
- Send `/newbot`, follow prompts
- Copy the token

**2. Configure**

```json
{
  "channels": {
    "telegram": {
      "enabled": true,
      "token": "YOUR_BOT_TOKEN",
      "allowFrom": ["YOUR_USER_ID"]
    }
  }
}
```

> Get your user ID from `@userinfobot` on Telegram.

**3. Run**

```bash
nanobot gateway
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>WhatsApp</b></summary>

Requires **Node.js ≥18**.

**1. Link device**

```bash
nanobot channels login
# Scan QR with WhatsApp → Settings → Linked Devices
```

**2. Configure**

```json
{
  "channels": {
    "whatsapp": {
      "enabled": true,
      "allowFrom": ["+1234567890"]
    }
  }
}
```

**3. Run** (two terminals)

```bash
# Terminal 1
nanobot channels login

# Terminal 2
nanobot gateway
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Feishu (飞书)</b></summary>

Uses **WebSocket** long connection — no public IP required.

```bash
pip install "nanobot-ai[feishu]"
```

**1. Create a Feishu bot**

- Visit [Feishu Open Platform](https://open.feishu.cn/app)
- Create a new app → Enable **Bot** capability
- **Permissions**: Add `im:message` (send messages)
- **Events**: Add `im.message.receive_v1` (receive messages)
  - Select **Long Connection** mode (requires running nanobot first to establish connection)
- Get **App ID** and **App Secret** from "Credentials & Basic Info"
- Publish the app

**2. Configure**

```json
{
  "channels": {
    "feishu": {
      "enabled": true,
      "appId": "cli_xxx",
      "appSecret": "xxx",
      "encryptKey": "",
      "verificationToken": "",
      "allowFrom": []
    }
  }
}
```

> `encryptKey` and `verificationToken` are optional for Long Connection mode.
> `allowFrom`: Leave empty to allow all users, or add `["ou_xxx"]` to restrict access.

**3. Run**

```bash
nanobot gateway
```

> [!TIP]
> Feishu uses WebSocket to receive messages — no webhook or public IP needed!

</details>

## ⚙️ Configuration

Config file (default): `~/.nanobot/config.json` (use `--profile` / `NANOBOT_PROFILE` or `--data-dir` / `NANOBOT_DATA_DIR` to change this)

### Providers

> [!NOTE]
> Groq provides free voice transcription via Whisper. If configured, Telegram voice messages will be automatically transcribed.

| Provider | Purpose | Get API Key |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `openrouter` | LLM (recommended, access to all models) | [openrouter.ai](https://openrouter.ai) |
| `anthropic` | LLM (Claude direct) | [console.anthropic.com](https://console.anthropic.com) |
| `openai` | LLM (GPT direct) | [platform.openai.com](https://platform.openai.com) |
| `groq` | LLM + **Voice transcription** (Whisper) | [console.groq.com](https://console.groq.com) |
| `gemini` | LLM (Gemini direct) | [aistudio.google.com](https://aistudio.google.com) |
| `zhipu` | LLM (Zhipu/GLM) | [open.bigmodel.cn](https://open.bigmodel.cn) |

### Agents

`agents.defaults` controls runtime behavior of the core agent.

| Field | Purpose | Default |
|------|---------|---------|
| `workspace` | Workspace path | `~/.nanobot/workspace` (or `~/.nanobot_<profile>/workspace`) |
| `provider` | Explicit provider override | `""` |
| `model` | LLM model id | `openai/gpt-oss-120b:exacto` |
| `maxTokens` | Max tokens per response | `8192` |
| `temperature` | Sampling temperature | `0.7` |
| `maxToolIterations` | Max tool loop iterations per message | `20` |
| `memoryScope` | Memory isolation boundary: `session` = per chat (channel:chat_id), `user` = per user (channel:sender_id) | `session` |
| `maxConcurrentMessages` | Max number of different chats processed in parallel (messages within the same chat are still sequential) | `4` |
| `memoryMaxChars` | Prompt budget for memory injection (chars) | `6000` |
| `skillsMaxChars` | Prompt budget for skills injection (chars) | `12000` |
| `bootstrapMaxChars` | Prompt budget for bootstrap files (chars) | `4000` |
| `toolErrorBackoff` | Tool retry backoff (attempts) | `3` |
| `autoTuneMaxTokens` | Auto-tune response length | `false` |
| `initialMaxTokens` | Initial tokens when auto-tune is on | `null` |
| `autoTuneStep` | Auto-tune step size | `512` |
| `autoTuneThreshold` | Auto-tune trigger threshold | `0.85` |
| `autoTuneStreak` | Consecutive triggers to adjust | `3` |

### Memory

Memory files live under the workspace `memory/` directory and are scoped based on `memoryScope`:

- `session`: `memory/sessions/<safe-session-key>/MEMORY.md`
- `user`: `memory/users/<safe-user-key>/MEMORY.md`

`safe-*` keys are derived from `channel:chat_id` or `channel:sender_id` with filesystem-unsafe characters replaced (e.g., `:` -> `_`).

nanobot indexes memory into `memory/memory.sqlite3` (SQLite with FTS when available) and retrieves only the most relevant chunks per request, instead of injecting a growing `MEMORY.md` into every prompt.

### Sessions

nanobot persists chat history as JSONL under `~/.nanobot/sessions/` (or `~/.nanobot_<profile>/sessions/`). Session writes are locked and atomic, so concurrent chats (or multiple processes) don't corrupt the history.

<details>
<summary><b>Full config example</b></summary>

```json
{
  "agents": {
    "defaults": {
      "model": "openai/gpt-oss-120b:exacto",
      "memoryScope": "session",
      "maxConcurrentMessages": 4
    }
  },
  "providers": {
    "openrouter": {
      "apiKey": "sk-or-v1-xxx"
    },
    "groq": {
      "apiKey": "gsk_xxx"
    }
  },
  "channels": {
    "telegram": {
      "enabled": true,
      "token": "123456:ABC...",
      "allowFrom": ["123456789"]
    },
    "whatsapp": {
      "enabled": false
    },
    "feishu": {
      "enabled": false,
      "appId": "cli_xxx",
      "appSecret": "xxx",
      "encryptKey": "",
      "verificationToken": "",
      "allowFrom": []
    }
  },
  "tools": {
    "web": {
      "search": {
        "apiKey": "BSA..."
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</details>

## CLI Reference

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `nanobot onboard` | Initialize config & workspace |
| `nanobot agent -m "..."` | Chat with the agent |
| `nanobot agent` | Interactive chat mode |
| `nanobot gateway` | Start the gateway |
| `nanobot status` | Show status |
| `nanobot channels login` | Link WhatsApp (scan QR) |
| `nanobot channels status` | Show channel status |
| `nanobot skills list` | List all available skills |
| `nanobot skills init <name>` | Create a new skill scaffold |
| `nanobot skills install <file>` | Install a .skill package |

<details>
<summary><b>Scheduled Tasks (Cron)</b></summary>

```bash
# Add a job
nanobot cron add --name "daily" --message "Good morning!" --cron "0 9 * * *"
nanobot cron add --name "hourly" --message "Check status" --every 3600

# List jobs
nanobot cron list

# Remove a job
nanobot cron remove <job_id>
```

</details>

## 🧩 Skills

Skills are modular packages that extend nanobot's capabilities with specialized knowledge, workflows, and bundled scripts. They let the agent handle domain-specific tasks it couldn't do with generic knowledge alone.

### Built-in Skills

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `github` | Interact with GitHub using the `gh` CLI |
| `weather` | Get weather info using wttr.in and Open-Meteo |
| `summarize` | Summarize URLs, files, and YouTube videos |
| `tmux` | Remote-control tmux sessions |
| `skill-creator` | Create and package new skills |

### Using Skills

Skills are loaded automatically. The agent sees a summary of all available skills in its system prompt and reads the full `SKILL.md` on demand when a task matches a skill's description.

Custom skills go in `~/.nanobot/workspace/skills/<skill-name>/SKILL.md`.

### Creating Skills

Ask the agent to create a skill — it has a built-in `skill-creator` skill with full instructions. Or scaffold one manually:

```bash
# Quick scaffold
nanobot skills init my-skill --description "Help with X"

# The agent can also use the full init script for more options:
# python nanobot/skills/skill-creator/scripts/init_skill.py my-skill --path ~/.nanobot/workspace/skills --resources scripts,references
```

### Installing Skills

Install a `.skill` file (a zip archive containing a skill directory):

```bash
nanobot skills install path/to/my-skill.skill

# Overwrite an existing skill
nanobot skills install path/to/my-skill.skill --force
```

### Skill Structure

```
my-skill/
├── SKILL.md          # Required: instructions + YAML frontmatter
├── scripts/          # Optional: executable code
├── references/       # Optional: docs loaded into context on demand
└── assets/           # Optional: templates, images, etc.
```

## 🐳 Docker

> [!TIP]
> The `-v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot` flag mounts your local config directory into the container, so your config and workspace persist across container restarts. If you're using a profile, mount `~/.nanobot_<profile>` instead.

Build and run nanobot in a container:

```bash
# Build the image
docker build -t nanobot .

# Initialize config (first time only)
docker run -v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot --rm nanobot onboard

# Edit config on host to add API keys
vim ~/.nanobot/config.json

# Run gateway (connects to Telegram/WhatsApp)
docker run -v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot -p 18790:18790 -p 18791:18791 nanobot gateway --webui

# Or run a single command
docker run -v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot --rm nanobot agent -m "Hello!"
docker run -v ~/.nanobot:/root/.nanobot --rm nanobot status
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```
nanobot/
├── agent/          # 🧠 Core agent logic
│   ├── loop.py     #    Agent loop (LLM ↔ tool execution)
│   ├── context.py  #    Prompt builder
│   ├── memory.py   #    Persistent memory
│   ├── memory_db.py#    Memory index + retrieval (SQLite/FTS)
│   ├── skills.py   #    Skills loader
│   ├── subagent.py #    Background task execution
│   └── tools/      #    Built-in tools (incl. spawn)
├── skills/         # 🎯 Bundled skills (github, weather, tmux...)
├── channels/       # 📱 WhatsApp integration
├── bus/            # 🚌 Message routing
├── cron/           # ⏰ Scheduled tasks
├── heartbeat/      # 💓 Proactive wake-up
├── providers/      # 🤖 LLM providers (OpenRouter, etc.)
├── session/        # 💬 Conversation sessions
├── config/         # ⚙️ Configuration
└── cli/            # 🖥️ Commands
```

## 🤝 Contribute & Roadmap

PRs welcome! The codebase is intentionally small and readable. 🤗

**Roadmap** — Pick an item and [open a PR](https://github.com/HKUDS/nanobot/pulls)!

- [x] **Voice Transcription** — Support for Groq Whisper (Issue #13)
- [ ] **Multi-modal** — See and hear (images, voice, video)
- [ ] **Long-term memory** — Never forget important context
- [ ] **Better reasoning** — Multi-step planning and reflection
- [ ] **More integrations** — Discord, Slack, email, calendar
- [ ] **Self-improvement** — Learn from feedback and mistakes

### Contributors

<a href="https://github.com/HKUDS/nanobot/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=HKUDS/nanobot&max=100&columns=12" />
</a>

## ⭐ Star History

<div align="center">
  <a href="https://star-history.com/#HKUDS/nanobot&Date">
    <picture>
      <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=HKUDS/nanobot&type=Date&theme=dark" />
      <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=HKUDS/nanobot&type=Date" />
      <img alt="Star History Chart" src="https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=HKUDS/nanobot&type=Date" style="border-radius: 15px; box-shadow: 0 0 30px rgba(0, 217, 255, 0.3);" />
    </picture>
  </a>
</div>

<p align="center">
  <em> Thanks for visiting ✨ nanobot!</em><br><br>
  <img src="https://visitor-badge.laobi.icu/badge?page_id=HKUDS.nanobot&style=for-the-badge&color=00d4ff" alt="Views">
</p>

<p align="center">
  <sub>nanobot is for educational, research, and technical exchange purposes only</sub>
</p>
